[Music]
want to start my story in Germany in
1877 the mathematician named Georg
Cantor and Cantor decided he was going
to take a line and erase the middle
third of the line and then take those
two resulting lines and bring them back
into the same process a recursive
process so he starts out with one line
and then two and then four and then 16
and so on and if he does this an
infinite number of times which you can
do in mathematics he ends up with an
infinite number of lines each of which
has an infinite number of points in it
so he realized he had a set whose number
of elements was larger than infinity and
this blew his mind literally keep
checking the sanitarium and when he came
out of the sanitarium he he was
convinced that he had been put on earth
to found transfinite set theory because
the largest set of infinity would be God
Himself is very religious man it's a
mathematician on a mission and other
mathematicians did the same sort of
thing Swedish mathematician von Koch
decided that instead of subtracting
lines he would add them and so he came
up with this beautiful curve and there's
no particular reason why we have to
start with this seed shape we can use
any any seed shape we like and I'll
rearrange this and I'll stick this
somewhere it down there okay and now
upon iteration that seed shape sort of
unfolds into a very different looking
structure so these all have the property
of self-similarity the part looks like
the whole it's the same pattern and many
different scales
now mathematicians thought this was very
strange because as you shrink a ruler
down you measure a longer and longer
length and since they went through the
iterations an infinite number of times
as the ruler shrinks down to infinity
the length goes to infinity this made no
sense at all so they consign these
curves to the back of the math books
they said these are pathological curves
and we don't have to discuss them
and that worked for a hundred years and
then in 1977 benoît mandelbrot the
French mathematician realized that if
you do computer graphics and use the
these shapes he called fractals you get
the shapes of nature you get the human
lungs you get acacia trees you get ferns
you get these beautiful natural forms if
you take your ear your thumb and your
index finger and look right where they
meet go ahead and do that now and and
relax your hand you'll see a crinkle and
then a wrinkle within the crinkle and a
crank within the wrinkle thing right
your body is covered with fractals the
mathematicians who are saying these are
pathologically useless shapes they were
breathing those words with fractal lungs
it's very erotic and I'll show you a
little natural recursion here we again
we just take these lines and recursively
replace them with the whole shape so so
here's the second iteration third fourth
and and so on so Nature has this self
similar structure nature uses
self-organizing systems now in the 1980s
I happen to notice that if you look at
an aerial photograph of an African
village
you see fractals and I thought this is
fabulous I wonder why and of course I
had to go to Africa and ask folks why so
I got a Fulbright scholarship to to just
travel around Africa for a year asking
people why they were building fractals
which is a great job if you can get it
and so I finally got to this city and I
done a little fractal model for the this
city just to see how it would sort of
unfold but when I got there I got to the
this palace of the chief and my French
is not very good I said something like
I'm a mathematician and I would like to
stand on your roof but he was really
cool about it he took me up there and
we've talked about fractals and and he
said oh yeah yeah we knew it rectangle
within a rectangle erect and we know all
about that and it turns out the Royal
insignia has a rectangle within a
rectangle within a rectangle and the
path through that palace is actually
this this spiral here and as you go
through the the path you have to get
more and more polite so they're mapping
the social scaling onto the geometric
scale it's a conscious pattern it is not
unconscious like a termite mound fractal
this is a village in southern Zambia the
bought by ela build this village is
about 400 meters in diameter you have a
huge ring the rings that represent the
family enclosures get larger and larger
as you go towards the back and then you
have the Chiefs ring here and towards
the back and then the Chiefs immediate
family in that ring so here's a little
fractal model for it here's one house
with the sacred altar here's the house
of houses the family enclosure with the
the humans here where the sacred altar
would be and then here's the village as
a whole a ring of ring of rings with the
Chiefs extended family here
the Chiefs immediate family here and
then here there's a tiny village only
this big now you might wonder how can
people fit in a tiny village only this
big that's because there's spirit people
it's the ancestors and of course the
spirit people have a little miniature
village in their village right so it's
just like Georg Cantor said the the
recursion continues forever this is in
the Mandara mountain near the Nigerian
border and in Cameroon moo-coo lek I saw
this diagram drawn by a French architect
I thought wow what a beautiful fractal
so I tried to come up with a seed shape
which upon iteration would unfold into
this thing and I came up with this
structure here and say his first
iteration second third fourth now after
I did the simulation I realized the
whole village kind of spirals around
just like this and here's that
replicating line self-replicating front
line that that unfolds into the fractal
well I noticed that line is about where
the only square building in the village
is that so when I got to the village I
said can you take me this we're a
building I think you know something's
going on there and they said well we can
take you there but you can't go inside
because that's the sacred altar where we
do sacrifices every year to keep up
those annual cycles of fertility from
the fields and I started to realize that
the cycles of fertility would just like
the recursive cycles in the geometric
algorithm that builds this and the
recursion in some of these villages
continues down to very tiny scale so
here's an on Connie village in Mali and
you can see you go inside the family
enclosure you go inside and here's pots
in the fireplace stack recursively
here's the calabashes that that
ISA was just showing us and they're
stacked recursively now the tiniest
calabash in here keeps the woman's soul
and when she dies they have her ceremony
where they break this stack called the
Salonga and her soul goes off to to
eternity once again once again infinity
is important now you might ask yourself
three questions at this point aren't
these scaling patterns just universal to
all indigenous architecture and that was
actually my original hypothesis when I
first saw those Afrin fractals I thought
wow so any indigenous group that doesn't
have a State Society that's in a
hierarchy must have a kind of bottom-up
architecture but that turns out not to
be true I started collecting aerial
photographs of Native American and South
Pacific architecture only the African
ones were fractal and if you think about
it all these different societies have
different geometric design themes that
they use so Native Americans use a
combination of circular symmetry and
fourfold symmetry and you can see on the
pottery and the baskets here's that
here's an aerial photograph of one of
the Anasazi ruins you can see it's
circular at the largest scale but it's
rectangular at the smaller scale right
it is not the same pattern at two
different scales second you might ask
well doctor a glass aren't you ignoring
the diversity of African cultures and
three times the answer is no first of
all I agree with mudan base wonderful
book the invention of Africa that Africa
is an artificial invention of first
colonialism and then oppositional
movements no because a widely shared
design practice doesn't necessarily give
you a unity of culture and it definitely
is not in the DNA and finally the
fractals have self similarity so they're
similar to themselves but they're not
necessarily similar to each other you
see very different uses for fractals
it's a shared technology in Africa and
finally well isn't this just intuition
it's not really mathematical knowledge
Africans can't possibly really be using
fractal geometry right it wasn't
indebted until the 1970s well it's true
that some African fractals are as far as
I'm concerned just pure intuition so
some of these things you know I would
wander around the streets of Dakar
asking people what's the algorithm
what's the rules for making this and
they'd say well you know we just make it
that way because it looks pretty stupid
but sometimes
sometimes that's not the case in some
cases they were to actually be
algorithms and very sophisticated
algorithm so in main what do sculpture
you see this recursive geometry in
Ethiopian crosses you see this wonderful
unfolding of the shape in Angola the
chalk way people draw lines in the sand
and it's what German mathematician Euler
called a graph we now call it an ole
Arian path you can never lift your
stylus in the surface and you can never
go over the same line twice but they do
it recursively and they do it with an
age grade system so the little kids
learning this one and then the older
kids learn this one and then the next
age great initiation you learned this
one and with with each iteration of that
algorithm you learn that the the
iterations of the myth you learn the
next level of knowledge and finally all
over Africa you see this board game it's
called a War II in Ghana where I studied
it it's called Mon kala here on the east
coast bow in Kenya so go elsewhere well
you see self-organizing patterns that
spontaneously occur in this board game
and the folks in in Ghana knew about
these self-organizing patterns and would
use them strategically so this is very
conscious knowledge here's a wonderful
fractal anywhere you go in the Sahel
you'll see this this this windscreen and
of course fences around the world or all
cartesian all strictly linear but here
in africa you've got these nonlinear
scaling fences so I tracked out one of
the folks who makes these things this
guy in Mali just outside of Bamako I
asked him how can I you're making
fractal fences because nobody else is
and his answer was very interesting he
said well if I lived in the jungle I
would only use the long rows of straw
because they're very quick in the very
cheap doesn't take much time doesn't
take much straw he said but wind and
dust goes through pretty easily now the
tight rows up at the very top they
really hold out the wind and dust but it
takes a lot of time and it takes a lot
of straw because they're really really
tight now he said we know from
experience that the farther up from the
ground you go the stronger the wind
blows right it's just like a
cost-benefit analysis and I measured out
the lengths of straw put in a log-log
plot got the scaling exponent it almost
exactly matches the scaling exponent for
the relationship between wind speed and
height in the wind engineer
so these guys are right on target for a
practical use of scaling technology the
most complex example of an algorithmic
approach to fractals that I found was
actually not in geometry it was in a
symbolic code and this was bombing us
and divination and the same divination
system is found all over Africa you can
find the east coast as well as the the
west coast and often that the the
symbols are very well preserved so so
each of these symbols has four bits it's
a four bit binary word you draw these
lines in the sand randomly and then you
count off and if it's an odd number you
put down one stroke and if it's an even
number you put down two stroke and they
did this very rapidly and I couldn't
understand where they were getting they
only did the randomness four times I
couldn't understand where they were
getting the other 12 symbols and they
wouldn't tell me they said no no no no I
can't tell you about this I said well
look I'll pay you you know you can be my
teacher and I'll come each day and pay
you so it's not a matter of money this
is a religious matter and finally out of
desperation I said well let me explain
Georg Cantor 1877 and I started
explaining in a why I was there in in
Africa and they got very excited when
they saw the Cantor set and one of them
said that's okay I can help you out here
and so he took me through the initiation
ritual for for a bomb and a priest and
of course I was only instead in the math
so the whole time he kept shaking his
head going you know I didn't learn it
this way but I I had to sleep with a
Kola nut next to my bed buried in sand
and gives seven coins to seven lepers
and and so on and finally he revealed
the the truth of the matter and it turns
out it's a pseudo-random number
generator they using deterministic chaos
when you have a 4-bit symbol you then
put it together with another one
sideways so even plus odd gives you odd
odd plus even gives you odd even plus
even gives you even odd plus odd gives
you even it's addition modulo two just
like in the parity bit check on your
computer and then you you take this
symbol and you put it back in so it's a
self-generating diversity of symbols
they're truly using a kind of
deterministic chaos and doing this now
because it's a binary code you can
actually implement this in hardware what
a fantastic teaching tool
should be in African engineering schools
and the most interesting thing I found
out about it was historical in the 12th
century Hugo of Santo Lea brought it
from Islamic mystics into Spain and
there it entered into the the the
alchemy community as geomancy that the
the divination through the earth this is
a geometric chart drawn by for the king
richard ii in 1390 Leiden it's the
German mathematician talked about
geomancy in his dissertation called de
combinatorial and he said well instead
of using one stroke and two strokes
let's use a 1 and a 0 and we can count
by powers of two right ones and zeros
the binary code George Boole took
likenesses binary code and created
boolean algebra and john von neumann
took bully now to bring created the
digital computer so all these these
little PDAs and laptops every digital
circuit in the world started in Africa
and I know Brian Eno says there's
there's not enough African computers but
you know I don't think there's enough
African history and Brian you know so
let me in with just a few words about
applications that we've we've found for
this and you can go to our website the
applets are all free they just run in
the browser anybody in the world can use
them the National Science Foundation's
broadening participation computing
program recently whereas a grant to make
a programmable version of these design
tools so hopefully in three years
anybody will be able to go on the web
and create their own simulations of
their own artifacts we focused in the
u.s. dawn on african-american students
as well as Native American Latino we
found statistically significant
improvement with children using this
software in the mathematics class in
comparison with it with a control group
that did not have the software so it's
really very successful teaching children
that they have a heritage that's about
mathematics that it's not just about
singing and dancing we've started a
pilot program in Ghana we got a small
seed grant just to see if folks would be
willing to work with us on this we're
very excited about the future
possibilities for that we've also been
working in design I didn't put his
name up here my colleague Kari in Kenya
has come up with this great idea for
using a fractal structure for postal
address in villages that have fractal
structures if you try to impose a a grid
structure postal system on a fractal
village it it doesn't quite fit bernard
tschumi at Columbia University has
finished using this in a design for a
Museum of African art David Hughes at
Ohio State University has written a
primer on Afrocentric architecture in
which he's used some of these fractal
structures and finally I just wanted to
point out that this idea of
self-organization as we heard earlier
you know it's it's in the brain it's in
the the the it's in Google search engine
actually the reason Google was such a
success is because they were the first
ones to take advantage of the
self-organizing properties of the web
it's an ecological sustainability it's
in the developmental power of
entrepreneurship the ethical power of
democracy it's it's also in some bad
things self-organization is why the AIDS
virus is spreading so fast and if you
don't think that capitalism which is
self-organizing can have destructive
effects you haven't open your eyes
enough so we need to think about as it
was spoken earlier the traditional
African methods for doing
self-organization these are robust
algorithms these are ways of doing
self-organization of doing
entrepreneurship that are gentle that
are a gala terian so if we want to find
a better way of doing that kind of work
we need look only no farther than Africa
to find these robust self-organizing
algorithms thank you
[Applause]
you